Setup Secure WebSockets (#293)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss.md

title: Setup Secure WebSocket
description: Instructions on enabling SSL for your node and setting up a secure WebSocket proxy server using nginx for remote connections.
---

# Setup Secure WebSocket

## Introduction

Ensuring secure WebSocket communication is crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of a Polkadot or Kusama node when interacting with remote clients. This guide walks you through setting up a secure WebSocket (WSS) connection for your node by leveraging SSL encryption with popular web server proxies like nginx or Apache. By the end of this guide, you'll be able to secure your node's WebSocket port, enabling safe remote connections without exposing your node to unnecessary risks.

## Secure a WebSocket Port

You can convert a non-secured WebSocket port to a secure WSS port by placing it behind an SSL-enabled proxy. This approach can be used to secure a bootnode or RPC server. The SSL-enabled apache2/nginx/other proxy server redirects requests to the internal WebSocket and converts it to a secure (WSS) connection. You can use a service like [LetsEncrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/){target=\_blank} to obtain an SSL certificate.

### Obtain an SSL Certificate

> You can follow the LetsEncrypt instructions for your respective web server implementation to get a free SSL certificate:

Reviewer: Add a link to letsencrypt

-  [nginx](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions?ws=nginx&os=ubuntufocal){target=\_blank}
-  [apache2](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions?ws=apache&os=ubuntufocal){target=\_blank}
 
LetsEncrypt will auto-generate an SSL certificate and include it in your configuration.

You can generate a self-signed certificate and rely on your node's raw IP address when connecting. However, self-signed certificates aren't optimal because you have to whitelist the certificate to access it from a browser.

Use the following commmand to generate a self-signed certificate using OpenSSL:

--8<-- 'code/infrastructure/setup-secure-wss/install-openssl.md'

## Install a Proxy Server

There are a lot of different implementations of a WebSocket proxy; some of the more widely used are [nginx](https://www.nginx.com/){target=\_blank} and [apache2](https://httpd.apache.org/){target=\_blank}, both of which are commonly used web server implementations. See the following section for configuration examples for both implementations.

### Use nginx

1. Install the `nginx` web server: 
    ```bash

>     apt install nginx

Reviewer: Maybe we should add a note somewhere that all the steps presented in this guide are for Ubuntu-like oss

Author: Added a note for unix based systems

---

> title: Setup Secure WebSocket

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Set Up Secure WebSocket
```

---

# Setup Secure WebSocket

## Introduction

Ensuring secure WebSocket communication is crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of a Polkadot or Kusama node when interacting with remote clients. This guide walks you through setting up a secure WebSocket (WSS) connection for your node by leveraging SSL encryption with popular web server proxies like nginx or Apache. By the end of this guide, you'll be able to secure your node's WebSocket port, enabling safe remote connections without exposing your node to unnecessary risks.

!!!info
    The following instructions are for UNIX-based systems.

## Secure a WebSocket Port

You can convert a non-secured WebSocket port to a secure WSS port by placing it behind an SSL-enabled proxy. This approach can be used to secure a bootnode or RPC server. The SSL-enabled apache2/nginx/other proxy server redirects requests to the internal WebSocket and converts it to a secure (WSS) connection. You can use a service like [LetsEncrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/){target=\_blank} to obtain an SSL certificate.

### Obtain an SSL Certificate

> You can follow the [LetsEncrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/){target=\_blank} instructions for your respective web server implementation to get a free SSL certificate:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LetsEncrypt suggests using the [Certbot ACME client](https://letsencrypt.org/getting-started/#with-shell-access/){target=\_blank} for your respective web server implementation to get a free SSL certificate:
```
I found it confusing when these links didn't open to LetsEncrypt, so added some language to clarify where the user can expect to end up

-  [nginx](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions?ws=nginx&os=ubuntufocal){target=\_blank}
-  [apache2](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions?ws=apache&os=ubuntufocal){target=\_blank}
 
LetsEncrypt will auto-generate an SSL certificate and include it in your configuration.

> You can generate a self-signed certificate and rely on your node's raw IP address when connecting. However, self-signed certificates aren't optimal because you have to whitelist the certificate to access it from a browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When connecting, you can generate a self-signed certificate and rely on your node's raw IP address. However, self-signed certificates aren't optimal because you must include the certificate in an allowlist to access it from a browser.
```

> Use the following commmand to generate a self-signed certificate using OpenSSL:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the following command to generate a self-signed certificate using OpenSSL:
```

--8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/install-openssl.md'

## Install a Proxy Server

There are a lot of different implementations of a WebSocket proxy; some of the more widely used are [nginx](https://www.nginx.com/){target=\_blank} and [apache2](https://httpd.apache.org/){target=\_blank}, both of which are commonly used web server implementations. See the following section for configuration examples for both implementations.

### Use nginx

1. Install the `nginx` web server: 
    ```bash
    apt install nginx
    ```

> 2. In an SSL-enabled virtual host add:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In an SSL-enabled virtual host, add:
```

    --8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/nginx-config.md'

3. Optionally, you can introduce some form of rate limiting:
    --8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/nginx-rate-limit.md'

### Use Apache2

Apache2 can run in various modes, including `prefork`, `worker`, and `event`. In this example, the [`event`](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/event.html){target=\_blank} mode is recommended for handling higher traffic loads, as it is optimized for performance in such environments. However, depending on the specific requirements of your setup, other modes like `prefork` or `worker` may also be appropriate.

1. Install the `apache2` web server:

>     --8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/install-apache2.md'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    --8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/install-apache2.md'
```
Code snippet wasn't rendering

> 2. The [`mod_proxy_wstunnel`](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_proxy_wstunnel.html){target=\_blank} provides support for the tunneling of WebSocket connections to a backend WebSocket server. The connection is automatically upgraded to a WebSocket connection. In an SSL-enabled `virtualhost` add:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The [`mod_proxy_wstunnel`](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_proxy_wstunnel.html){target=\_blank} provides support for the tunneling of WebSocket connections to a backend WebSocket server. The connection is automatically upgraded to a WebSocket connection. In an SSL-enabled virtual host add:
```
It was written this way in the earlier instances/steps so let's keep consistent

    --8<-- 'code/infrastructure/running-a-node/setup-secure-wss/apache2-config.md'

    !!!warning 
        Older versions of `mod_proxy_wstunnel` don't upgrade the connection automatically and will need the following config added:
        ```apacheconf
        RewriteEngine on
        RewriteCond %{HTTP:Upgrade} websocket [NC]
        RewriteRule /(.*) ws://localhost:9944/$1 [P,L]
        RewriteRule /(.*) http://localhost:9944/$1 [P,L]
        ```

> 3. Optionally, some form of rate limiting can be introduced:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Optionally, some form of rate limiting can be introduced by first running the following command:
```

    ```bash
    apt install libapache2-mod-qos
    a2enmod qos
    ```

>     And edit `/etc/apache2/mods-available/qos.conf`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Then edit `/etc/apache2/mods-available/qos.conf` as follows:
```

    ```conf

>     # allows max 50 connections from a single ip address:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # allows max 50 connections from a single IP address:
```

    QS_SrvMaxConnPerIP                                 50
    ```

## Connect to the Node

1. Open [Polkadot.js Apps interface](https://polkadot.js.org/apps){target=\_blank} and click the logo in the top left to switch the node

> 2. Activate the **Development** toggle and input your node's address - either the domain or the IP address. Remember to prefix with `wss://` and if you're using the 443 port, append `:443` as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Activate the **Development** toggle and input either your node's domain or IP address. Remember to prefix with `wss://` and, if you're using the 443 port, append `:443` as follows:
```

    ```bash
    wss://example.com:443
    ```

> ![A sync-in-progress chain connected to Polkadot.js UI](/images/infrastructure/general/setup-secure-wss/secure-wss-01.webp)

Reviewer 2: This image is missing
